Dear Reviewers,

Thank you so much for your thoughts. You all have good points. 

AI is useful, but at the same time researchers wish to engage with the ideas of real people. Out of respect for the reviewers, any AI contributions to these rebuttals are clearly marked in <AI></AI> tags, and human authors have ensured the correctness of the AI contributions. Content outside of such tags is human-written.

Many of you were concerned by the fact that Decan underperforms the SentBERT baseline.  While it is true that we would have loved our new approach to outperform existing popular approaches in the first paper, our early experiments did not reach that level. They do, however, convincingly demonstrate that in-context learning is a promising new foundation for measuring diversity. We wish to publish our findings not because we have the final word on the subject of in-context learning diversity metrics, but because we want to open this area of research for others to develop and build upon. This is in line with NeurIPS' Main Track Handbook, so this should not count against our paper. The Handbook states that "To help the NeurIPS community move faster out of local minima, it is important to encourage risk and recognize that new approaches can't initially yield state-of-the-art competitive results..." The reviewers were all impressed with our originality, assigning it 3/4/3.

After submitting the paper, we did perform an experiment which demonstrates a case in which in-context learning diversity (in this case, the residual surprise a_n) is superior to SentBERT. When sentence share a structure but have different meanings and different words, in-context learning can pick up on the pattern while neither SentBERT nor n-grams can identify the pattern. <AI>Put an explanation here and the numbers, two sentences, brief</AI>

pAJML: By “reference corpus” we were referring to the datasets such as the SNLI, MultiNLI, and STS-Benchmark datasets used to train Sentence-BERT. We apologize for not making that clear. While empirically Sentence-BERT generalizes well from these datasets, we developed Decan in part because we disliked the idea of relying on the model to generalize from a limited dataset. By using base model in-context learning, we instead rely on the model to generalize from a vast internet-scale dataset of patterns. <insert more about the other things pAJML asked about>. We concede that SentBERT (.3B parameters) is much smaller than Qwen2.5-3B.

The motivation of measuring diversity has a different set of requirements than the database-scale similarity metrics like Sentence-BERT. For applications such as performing reinforcement learning for creative-writing, it is important that a diversity metric can withstand optimization pressure and more closely tracks the thing we want to optimize, and we argue that we have reasons to expect in-context learning diversity metrics will track this better, though we left this for future work. Distinct-n, in contrast, would assign random noise the highest diversity score, and Decan avoids that pitfall. The speed and memory usage of the algorithm is less important for this use case. 

You asked about the "assumption that the diversity decreases from Base model, to SFT, DPO, RLVR". We didn't just assume it, we also measured the correlation between Decan and existing metrics and found that they correlated strongly (Figure 18).
Ok

pAJM: Although the paper does not report whether coherence alone can separate the checkpoints, we did check whether coherence alone can classify the ConTest dataset (Table 2). Seeing that it performed much worse than Decan, we used Decan for further experiments. Additionally, in unreported numbers on the OLMo experiments, we find that coherence rises rather than falls during post-training while D falls. <AI>0.436 → 0.674 → 0.694 → 0.698</AI>

2bo8: 
While it is true that we did not systematically investigate “prompts, n, evaluated-model scale”, we did investigate the judge model, finding that stronger judge models did not improve classification on (Dataset section X). Furthermore, more recent investigations have shown that when the judges are in {set} and generation models are in {set}, the generation models account for 82-90% of the variance, and judge identity accounts for 8-12% of the variance. This indicates that the metric can be compared across judge models <fact check please?>.
We constructed two simple prompts, one for the “chat” format and one for the “completion” format, and we found them adequate (Appendix B.1). We do not see a particular reason to expect different prompts to perform differently. 
Our perspective is that the choice of ’n’ is determined by the desired sensitivity to tails. If a practitioner wants types of responses with probability greater than 1/m to count as “too common to be diverse”, then the practitioner should set ’n’ to greater than 2m so that that type of response appears more than twice in expectation. For example, if an evaluator wants to know the diversity of the types of responses a model is capable of producing with probability greater than 1/m, they can set n=2m. We removed the section because similarity vary continuously rather than being discrete. We now realize that we should have kept it in, since it is still informative even though it is a simpler case.

W3: It is true that Dean’s absolute values are difficult to compare across models and meant to be evaluated relative to the same model. This is similarly true of embedding-based metrics like SentBERT. In practice, your concerns are <?>, when looking at the Olmo pipeline <x> of the variance is from grader identity and <y> from generator identity.

Appendix C.6 explains why it is not possible to recommend a single metric. There are many ways to make use of in-context learning to measure diversity, and many options are available depending on a practitioner's use case. Appendix B discusses choice of n and recommends fixing it for comparisons.

Discard:
We removed it because similarity varies continuously rather than being discrete. We now realize that we should have kept it in, since it is still informative even though it is a simpler case. ’n-1’ is the size of the set you wish to consider when evaluating whether a new response is novel. This makes intuitive sense: if you only look at one response, everything seems novel. If you look at 2 responses, there is one comparison to make. If we approximate this process by pretending that there are a finite number of types of responses, the Coupon Collector problem analysis applies. As the number of responses you consider increases, you become more likely include a member of each type in your set. Once your n-1 responses contain every possible type of response, then any new response has no diversity. Tuning n is therefore up to the practitioner. For example, lets say a practitioner has a language model and wants to sample from it a number of times and figure out of there are 10 different kinds of responses. 